world
a landmark decision in
the ongoing debate over
NSA surveillance as a federal
court rules that bulk collection
Americans
phone records is illegal good
evening I'm but I for judy
Woodruff is away
also ahead this Thursday after
months of false starts political
maneuvering and
heated debate
Congress voted overwhelmingly
today to give itself a voice
in nuclear talks with
Iran senators John
film and Tim Kaine join us to
discuss the PAP too rare
consensus
plus after the recent unrest in
Baltimore can the city overcome
its lasting economic impact when
they're at their boiling point
when it comes to
them lashing out was the worst
that can happen is already
falling down around those are
some other stories we're
covering on tonight
PBS Newshour Saudi Arabia and
the United States call today for
a five-day
cease-fire in the Yemen conflict
Secretary of State John Kerry
said it would allow a to reach
millions of
civilians
carry appeared with Saudi
foreign minister in
Riyadh the saudis agreed to stop
bombing provided that Shiite who
the rebels and
the Iranian supporters
won't try to exploit the law
we strongly urge duties
and those who back
whom we suggest
use all of their influence not
to miss this major opportunity
to address the needs of the
Yemeni people at find a peaceful
way forward
in Yemen the humanitarian
situation in Yemen has worsened
sharply since the
saudi bombing campaign
began in March
the UN's humanitarian
coordinator in Yemen says about
1400 people have been
killed
and six thousand wounded within
three hundred thousand others
have fled their
homes in a bid to
escape the fighting
Turkey and Saudi Arabia have
formed a working alliance to
help rebels in Syria
The Associated Press reports
they are aiding factions opposed
to Syrian
President Bashar al Assad
with logistical support and
funding the US opposes helping
some other groups
because they are
Islamists router
als meanwhile the Pentagon
confirms that the US military
advisers
have begun training Syrians to
battle Islamic state forces
ninety candidates are taking
instruction in jordan
the effort was delayed for
months and Defense Secretary
Ashton Carter
acknowledged
it will still be some time
before the fighter see combat
these at trainees are recruited
their vetted and only then
are they put into trainee
so they've been in the
program for quite a while
i'd in the Pro than the training
take some time and then they
would be
in inserted into operations
other training sites are in
Saudi Arabia Qatar
and Turkey
more than thirty seven hundred
Syrians have volunteered
its election night in Britain
and exit polls say there's a
surprise outcome
the ruling conservatives have
far exceeded expectations easily
winning the
most seats
they'll still need to form a
coalition with the smaller party
party leaders and millions of
other voters cast ballots today
after a
campaign that focused
on economic troubles
the National Health Service
and the issue up migrants
iran has released a cargo ship
it sees last week in the persian
gulf
the Maersk tigress will
now continue onto the
United Arab Emirates Iran have
said the company that chartered
the ship
owed money to an Iranian firm
it's unclear whether any money
was paid to
win the vessels release
back in this country people
across tornado alley kept a
weather eye out for
a new storms today
more than fifty twister
struck yesterday in oklahoma
Kansas Nebraska and Texas
most plowed up farmland
but in the oklahoma City area
two tornadoes blasted businesses
and tore roofs off homes no one
was killed but about a dozen
people were
hurt
at a trailer park we're
watching it form
above us and I had no clue
anything was going on over here
I mean no clue at all but
I needed to come home and
check what was going on
in there's nothing worked
the storm system also dumped as
much as eight inches of rain
around oklahoma
City
triggering flash floods one
woman drowned when her
underground storm
shelter flooded
Wall Street had a relatively
quiet day the Dow Jones
Industrial Average gained
more than 80 points to close
above seventeen thousand
900 the Nasdaq rose 26 points
and the S&P 500 added nearly
eight still to come on the news
hour what a court ruling could
mean for the
future of government
surveillance
another casualty of Nepal's
earthquake a priceless cultural
heritage
two senators way and on the Iran
nuclear negotiations are what
role congress
should play
can Baltimore businesses bounce
back from the economic toll of
the riots
how these high school students
are taking campus safety into
their own
hands
and a new book on the price
of past missteps in Iraq
the debate between privacy and
security return to center stage
today
after a federal appeals court
ruled the National Security
Agency program
that allow book collection that
millions have US phone records
went too far
but where is the line and as a
deadline approaches for review
renewing the
underlying Patriot Act
what happens now joining me to
discuss the value of such
government
surveillance are Kate Martin
director of the center for
national security studies
a civil liberties advocacy group
and Stewart baker a former
general counsel
at the National Security Agency
and former assistant secretary
of homeland security welcome
to you both Kate Martin was this
the drops shoe that privacy
advocates were
waiting on
yes this is that first time
that a federal appeals court
has look at what was there
secret interpretation by their
government
that allowed it to
collect and massive
amount a records
on Americans under
secret interpretation of the
law and the court said that
that secret interpretation
that the law was not
in fact authorized by the
congress and so how the program
to be a violation of
the law
so what does this do to stop the
program in its tracks no
actually the
its it's remarkably
without consequence say
it at the end of the
day says congress
in the view with this court
didn't authorize exactly what
the program is
and unless Congress says that
its authorized it's not going to
continue
and then they send it back to
the judge leading the judge in
the district court
determine whether to enjoin a
to but really that's just a just
underlines what we already know
which is
that Congress has to act
in the next three weeks because
if it doesn't the program goes
away
automatically
if it does it's going to have
to say yes we're approving this
program doesn't matter whether
the court decided today that
this was illegal
or unconstitutional as it
neither did not decide that it
was unconstitutional
they said it was not approved by
congress
I was a close call in my view
whether it was approved by
congress
to I think they're wrong but
they said was not approved by
congress congress
has a chance and
really obligation
rule on whether this case
this my program will continue
are by the end of the month
I and a so they will
they will they will have to say
something and that will put in
and
really to the
discussion in this case
kate mara so they didn't rule on
the constitutionality together
the matter
I'm
am jurisprudence you don't get
to that question if you decide
the statute but
opinion which is 90
some pages long made
out that concerns about on
how the program threatens
Americans privacy
and the concerns about how these
new technological tools that are
available
to the government
my really require
re understanding up what's
constitutional and not
considered as
rusty argument in those 94 pages
about whether this was tying the
hands of the
intelligence community
no it did not am but that you
know the intelligence community
doesn't make that
argument anymore some
adn politicians
make that argument
Stewart might make that argument
I'm not sure politician your
know I know that was
including you placed but the
and Director of National
Intelligence and the president
after extensive reviews by
outsiders and insiders which
concluded that
I'm the program hand resulted in
stopping any terror attacks
decided that there was
no intelligence value
that they needed to continue the
program the essence of the
program being
that the NSA gets all up
the telephone records
have all come from calls made or
receipt and the white house has
been steadily
backing away from
the need for that
so you say both say that by the
end of this month when the
Patriot Act expire
something has to happen
what has to happen for
congress what McKenna action
can congress take to change
that con congress can
reauthorize it I in which case
the court's opinion will be
overtaken by events at they can
modify the program in which case
the statute will be better
tailored to what the program is
or what new program
is adopted
or they can let dianne
and take the risk that to about
this program in a lot of other
things that
are done with this is already
will not be available at 4
attacked by terrorists
but the weapon what the
problem that happens well i i
there are a whole lot
authorities a lot of programs
that depend
on the ability to ask on
service provider store:
data about their customers
targeted requests as well as
I'd are broader requests at
all of them will go away
the section is not reauthorized
well the most likely outcome I
think in congress
or
the what I hope to be the likely
outcome is that congress adopt a
package of
reforms which has been
considering for the past year
I'm known as USA freedom act the
an it has the support at the
administration and basically
those
reforms
would not reinstitute the
program that the court held the
illegal today
they provide a different way
for the government to get
on some other information
and they all fell
they also make reforms other
sections have the Patriot Act
that statute that weren't
addressed by court
on there is
widespread bipartisan
support for those reforms
in both houses of Congress
I the House Judiciary Committee
passed it overwhelmingly last
week
and the house is expected
to adopt them next week
there has been I think
I can have peculiar
afterward to say oh no we should
continue the program as it is
when the intelligence community
itself isn't asking for that and
says
these reforms would
be better soul
I I think Kate was right when
she said only some other data
will be available
that
the data will disappear
because records will be kept
and when we need to try
to find people quickly II
and to find out who they're
conspiring with the if there is
a terrorist
conspiracy in the
united states cities
sponsored from abroad we
won't be able to do that now
unelectable collection however
is an alternate to doing it the
way they've
been doing it
that the court today
said it was not legal
what the court said was simply
the statute was not written to
authorize
that
right so little money easy for
congress to say we're going to
authorize it with
certain kinds of constraints
for protection any number
they could take all over the
a constraints that are already
part of the court orders
okay testers bipartisan interest
in this in this bill this other
then there's bipartisan doubts
about the right program
especially in the senate
about about about USA
freedom by and to
so the area's there is genuine
debate immersed Senate
particular
in the house I the far left in
the far right have agreed to
just a light disliked this
program and they have the
majority at this point so
I think the house will pass the
USA freedom bill I do not think
that the
senate will do that
well well we're almost at a time
leave a very quick common I just
wanna say and
the rule of law questions
this interpretation with secret
interpretation adopted by the
Bush
administration and the law
and then the Obama and then the
Obama administration when pushed
with fused to make that
interpretation public okay I
admit that I i
okay we're gonna have to leave
it there Kate Martin at the
Center for national
security studies
Stewart Baker former assistant
secretary are Department
Department of Homeland
Security that's right
after I got it all out thank
you both very much pleasure
thousands of Nepalese gather
today per prayer ritual and
ceremony
marking the end of a traditional
Hindu mourning period held after
the massive
earthquake
the death toll has grown to more
than seventy eight hundred
people
another 15,000 happen injured
engineers are continuing to
inspect
thousands of damaged
houses around katmandu
the earthquake also brought
considerable destruction and
damage to religious
cultural & Heritage Sites
throughout the region
jeffrey Brown report on that
part of his ongoing work on
culture at risk
the cremation up bodies
continue this week in Katmandu
as officials warned the death
toll from the 7.8 magnitude
earthquake could hit
10,000 meanwhile
aid workers have struggled to
reach remote areas hampered by
customs delays
closed roads and difficult to
rain and villagers have grown
frustrated by the
pace
an amount to relieve getting
to them in about a minute ago
it is so little what can one do
with the Los summit 15 to 20
people in their
faint
how long will it last it won't
last the humanitarian crisis
colossal lives meat cooked
food shelter and medicine
has been devastating in this
mountainous country that is one
of the world's
poorest
at the same time another
kind of crisis has
also unfolded this region once
stood at the intersection of
trade routes
connecting
India and China and became
home to a rich heritage if
are in architecture dating
back many centuries
today many of those sites sedges
bach to poor square and
part-time Durbar Square both in
the Kathmandu Valley
are badly damaged there are
many of the temples which
call up stand or
so many of the and
our historical houses in which
the families where reliving
appropriate only but that would
be our streets maybe even cannot
go with the
moment though this is very
difficult to assess their
Christian man hard is the
director of the United
Nations
officer cultural
heritage in cash
and do and in part
under a square we also
have to I i must say fifty
percent of the tempers have
have gone there just Robin all
but fortunately the royal
palaces to
standing
except want our bitches
which is the meaning
and which we have two
consolidate very
quickly that he doesn't that
it doesn't for before dawn
in that city soldiers and
volunteers worked to clear
bricks and debris from a
Hindu temple
we love our temple
the mall so look
at now what to
give and I want to
heads Campbell they carefully
and are the temple
room since the earthquake man
hearts team has been working to
assess the
damage to the country's many
temples in historic sites
and there has been some good
news long beanie temple for
example
said to be the birthplace of
the Buddha was left unharmed
nepal is home to four
designated World Heritage Sites
to natural into cultural one
site alone the Kathmandu Valley
contains 7 world-renowned groups
have monuments and buildings
and tourism is vital to
this poor countries economy
it the largest concentration
World Heritage Sites you
know anywhere in the world
and absolutely unique
in their style
and in their mixture have Hindu
and Buddhist and secular
traditions
gabbard I'm in is curator up
south and southeast Asian art
at the Smithsonian's freer and
Sackler galleries in washington
itself home to any
police body shop
these are France Castres
and woodcarvers
work historically considered you
know among the greatest are to
serve the
region
and they not only worked in
Nepal but they were called to
China
and they worked into that so
they were they were understood
is really important
it's a fact not lost
on locals after
early reports looting man
heart says citizen's police and
the military have come together
to protect
the sites
these are not just relics from a
bygone era he and others point
out
but living history people
interact with on a daily basis
that was on display this
week in the capital
where even amid the destruction
and loss life ni police
celebrated the Buddha's birth
when I arrived in Nepal
I was really struck by the
spirituality of the people by
this living
culture they still have
they go to the temple
every morning to give
some a offerings
each temple has its own
festive errors and the
the people a very strongly
connected and that's part of it
the lice and what is the
danger of course if the
tangible a heritage though
the tempers disappear
that and also the Intangible
Heritage Room the
disappear there are reasons for
some hope the way the temples in
buildings
were constructed for example
should make them easier to
rebuild many of them are in this
very distinctive
Napoli's style that uses brick
and and would so we see
these go to like towers
as many different Ruth and and
struts that are made have carved
wood
and when there's an earthquake
those buildings tend to fall
straight down
and the struts survive and the
brick survive so there's a lot
that can be
recycled
and also we have Ferretti 28
documentation you have good
photographs
of the side so we have for
architectural drawings and plans
we have measurements
so all this helps for
future restoration
man had says that with thousands
have temples to restore
the work could take at least
10 years and perhaps decades
are part of a rebuilding effort
throughout the country
that by all accounts will
require a huge international
eat commitment for
the PBS Newshour
I'm jeffrey Brown in Washington
in a rare
near unanimous and bipartisan
vote the senate declared it
would have it's a an
ongoing nuclear talks with Iran
the Iran nuclear agreement
Review Act passed +98 21
it would give Congress at 02:52
days to review any proposed
nuclear agreement
with Iran
during that time the president
could not reduce imposed
sanctions
and Congress could vote up or
down on any proposed agreement
a two-thirds vote would be
needed to override any resulting
presidential
detail
I spoke earlier with two
senators who joined in the
overwhelming support for
the measure
we begin with Republican
John though not South Dakota
said or written thank you for
joining us so what the congress
feel it had to have
its say today
well I think there's a concern
well among the american people
go and
have in needs to be voice
through their representatives in
Congress about
an Iranian nuclear agreement
that the administration is in
the process have
negotiating I think there's this
has a huge national security
card consequences
not only for our allies in the
region but the United States
and so the the congress in the
legislation we pass a day and it
was an
overwhelming vote
I think went on the
record expressing their
I desire to be a part of this
process and have an opportunity
to at least
review
and in approve or disapprove
whatever agreement the
administration negotiates
you're right that was an
overwhelming vote but even
though only one person
voted against the final bill
several love your colleagues %uh
senator Rubio said a cruise
senator Carr
they had all been a little bit
concerned about give about
seeming to give
congressional
it's good congress' blessing to
any deal how did you overcome
those concerns
right well I think in the end
what they their argument was a
yes you don't want
to have congress on the
record in any way blessing
this thing but the in the
end it's going to take a
basically 67 votes in the
congress for anything
that the president
I should say citing 34 votes to
approve a twenty 67 votes to
disapprove anything
that the administration
negotiate and the one thing that
the legislation does
I think this was probably the
most compelling argument
supportive
getting people on board with
this at least we have an
opportunity reviewer we
get 30 days
it will be an opportunity to
educate the american people
about the particulars
the details at this
thing and what it means
and I think that was probably
the most compelling argument
a in favor love moving for this
legislation which by the way was
negotiated
really by bob Corker
and I had 65 yr 64
cosponsors when it started out
so this story tell that broad
bipartisan support
the president had indicated that
he would veto it and he only
came along
reluctantly when it became clear
that this thing was gonna Paso
I think that this is this is an
important step forward in
insuring that the american
people and members of Congress
have an opportunity
to debate
review and act ultimately on
whatever deal the administration
negotiated but
couldn't the congress did they
have debated be viewed in
enacted
on this even without I do matter
what happened with this deal
couldn't
congresses have done this
anytime well they could but
there was no guarantee that we
would have the
opportunity to see it
the this requires administration
presented
and and you know in in
all its details and
line by line and so congress the
American people going to have a
chance
to see it
arguably there were certain
people probably the would have
had a chance to
to see it anyway but for
the entire congress and
in by virtual that the american
people have an opportunity to
review this deal
it took a process like this
and I think that's why
in the end you know that's what
won it out early on in this one
at the
objections from the white house
and from some Democrats was that
Congress was
going to hurt
the over did the deal still
being negotiated still being
firmed up
in nineteen either the end
however they are this weekend
that would hurt the
overall negotiations
why won't this I think
in the end it gives
gives additional leverage the
administration because now the
iranians
No
the other parties nor allies
know that this is something that
congress is at
least gonna weigh in on
and and I think that's another
threshold that is their
negotiating have to think
about your for example
I had an amendment that
ultimately didn't get voted on
that would have
required the state department
to investigate whether
or not the IAEA I
EA really had the ability
under the agreement
to to take a look at these
military sites to see if the
Iranians were in
compliance
it things like that I think ur
are really important the
American people
things like that I think
are really important to
individual members of congress
and I think the administration
should use that
to their advantage when there
we go shooting this deal
accept your amendment didn't get
those on a lot about amendments
didn't get
voted on they were shut down
by the senate Majority Leader
isn't this it is the thing
republicans use a complaint that
Harry Reid it all
the time well it did
that the democrats had no
interest in in helping on this
because they didn't have
any amendments they offered they
wanted to see the bill move for
for without amendment we had a
number of members in our site
you didn't wanna
offer amendments the democrats
objected in Black Hills
in the year and we want to get
the bill passed and yes it would
have been nice
to have a debate about
amendments more so those
amendments ultimately would
have been defeated
it would be nice to think that
we could have even strengthen
the bill
before it passed but if I'm the
white house I look at this
entire process and
say you know this is good for
us because this gives us
is we negotiate a stronger hand
and I think in the end that
enables them
if they're willing to use that
to get a better deal senator
john
thing in a South Dakota thank
you very much thanks when I also
spoke with
virginia's democratic
senator Tim Kaine
senator mccain thank you for
joining us it is so unusual to
see such an
overwhelming bipartisan
agreement how significant was
this vote today
it was a huge role when both for
what it means and what it
portends
you know this was a bill
that was introduced in 2014
by fourteen republican senator
corker and 13 other Republicans
a very
partisan bill but we started to
work on it together in January
recognizing the state's an
Iranian nuclear negotiations
nothin play around
with
and we made some significant
changes to turn it into a
a bipartisan bill after
some other drama in
February in and March here in
the senate the letter A 47 to
the supreme leader
we felt like we needed to show
I'm each other and our public
that we could
consider an important matter
like and deal with Iran
in a way that was delivered
have and prompt in bipartisan
and when we got the bill done in
the Foreign Relations Committee
where I
serve on a unanimous vote
and we got a 98 one vote on the
floor today it shows that the
senate
can step up and take these
responsibilities on our
shoulders and do
them well
now we have to do the same thing
with this nine-month war against
I so what's
going on
well you know the white house
had originally at some point
maybe it was
about the time I this 47 the
Republican signing the letter
to the ayatollah I they had said
that they would be tailed this
yep watch what changed well I
think you know it one we got the
votes you know we
we had we had an
undeniable momentum for this
bill but I also think the White
House
as they look at it they realized
something on
if the choice was between
congressional engagement or no
engagement
this white house and probably
ever wide every other white
house would prefer no
engagement
but that was never really the
choice because the white house
is negotiating
with Iran using a congressional
impose sanctions regime as the
as the lever in the negotiation
we were always going to be
involved
so once they realize that
the real choice was between
disc on Kristen gage under a set
of rules that is prompt and
careful and
well-defined
or this congress engage kinda
under a free-for-all set of
rules
they realize that the better
course was to have a careful
review and that's what
we've we've done we've given the
president
the ability to do waver a vague
executive for international
sanctions
without congress
but when he proposes relief
under the congressional statute
then we enter a
review period thats prompt
and then we have to render
either an approval or
disapproval or take no
action
so that we can quickly you
know give a congressional
you can a signal about what we
would intend and that's the
right way to do
this now you mentioned the
ongoing conflict with I so he
spoke about that on the senate
for today do you envision
this as a blueprint for
congressional action on other
international issues I would
only to be
the purview of the
executive branch
I i really do when a dove course
the executive branch's uge
per view on matters of diplomacy
and also on matters of
of war but congress has our
progress as well and non
are so important as the power
the Congress to declare war
today is the end up nine months
%uh unilateral executive or
without a single
vote
on the floor either house of
Congress about whether we should
be engaged
in military action against I saw
it's been incredibly frustrating
but what I saw happen in the
Foreign Relations committee over
the last month
or so
coming together and try to
tackle a tough issue consistent
with our
responsibilities
in a bipartisan way I think what
happened today
portends that we can use the
same approach is we as we
grapple with the
president's proposed
authorization for the worgen
sisal
we should be putting our service
members lives at risk unless
Congress is willing
to have a debate
and say that the mission is in
the national interest now I ask
senator john
10 this not that short time
ago and I want to ask you to
harder the criticism about
congressional intervention here
is that you were going to
endanger the ultimate agreement
which still hasn't
come to fruition
out with State Senator John
Kerry's been involved when with
do you anticipate that this will
make his job tougher easier
I i think it'll make it easier
when I look i I take that
concerns seriously
that's why I did not agree and
have not agreed to be part of
any sanctions
legislation
during the course in the
negotiation with Iran because
the terms and the
negotiations said we wouldn't do
any more sanctions while we were
negotiating but the term to the
negotiation didn't say
that congress couldn't
sign off on the deal indeed the
deal that's being negotiated is
one
that the Iranian parliament
has to sign off on and
a runny in leaders are very
sophisticated about our
political system
if they want out from under
congressional sanctions
they understand that congress is
going to have a say so the fact
that congress
will weigh and
once a deal was done
if a deal is done
is not surprising to them
they've anticipated from the
beginning
that will not cause these
negotiations to go off the rails
senator Tim Kaine democrat a
virginia thank you very much
thanks when in
Baltimore Mayor Stephanie
rawlings-blake today announced a
new effort to tackle
the city's
long-standing problems
the one Baltimore campaign as
it's called is designed to bring
business
religious and community groups
together to help rebuild the
city given the city's difficult
history the mayor's
initiative reflects concern
about the potential
long-term told the latest
upheaval could leave on sum up
its already most
troubled neighborhoods
economics correspondent Paul
Solman went to Baltimore to take
a look
part of our ongoing reporting on
making sense a financial news
which airs every Thursday
on the news hour
the Southern Baptist Church in
straight stricken Baltimore
this annual celebration of
the area's church archer's
seem jarring given the
lost the pastor don t
it means flock suffered last
week there half-built senior
housing complex and
community center
torch fully a third the
twelve million dollar project
reduced to rubble within
hours so to the church bus
it was heartbreaking we built
invested in the community and
who would do something like this
but they're asking a bigger
question in the
city at large
went to last week's events
portend for the economy a
baltimore as a whole
on relatively
up-scale Federal Hill
the market's boy real estate
firm colloquially known as
willing bill on
the hill
business was off by
roughly a hundred percent
these are the ones that were
cancel consider co owner will
run about
says buyers and renters are
staying away in droves
the phones not been ringing and
no one's been walking and as for
investors
we have two properties on the
market right now with a
commercial retail
presence on the first floor
and then multiple apartments
above those type A properties
have been extremely
popular and now this week
we've seen a drastic decline
in request even see them in the
similarly trendy Fells Point
neighborhood
the boutique hotel
in at the black our
suffered the same fate I'd never
experienced anything in my
lifetime like
this
co owner demetrius pleaaase says
he was swamped by cancellations
we were at a hundred percent
occupancy this is the busy
season
and had to give refunds
we lost all reservations
we lost a buncha parties
price will cut by two-thirds
occupancy was cut by two-thirds
at least in baltimore's famously
revived Inner
Harbor
economic consultant under bond
Basu's summed up this is really
hammered the
lesion hospitality segment
the city of Baltimore
we've had bars there
lost about 95 percent of their
normal business traffic
we've had a number of wheels
games canceled including one
that took place
with no fans
and of course there's the direct
damage from the ride on Monday
night
that's gonna make it that much
more difficult to market this
city not just a
Taurus
but to students who attend Johns
Hopkins or loyal university or
the US mail in
Baltimore
people who are being recruited
for corporate positions at Under
Armour T
rowe Price Legg Mason
and other businesses in
Baltimore City and so anyone who
thinks that these
effects won't linger
i think is naive
I grew up in Detroit and
I remember the 1967
rights economic historian Robert
margo doesn't just remember the
nineteen
sixties right
its he studied their effects in
dozens of cities across the US
the riots were unambiguously
negative they
reduced incomes and
african-americans employment
and the reduced housing values
local amenities shopping firms
like this
basically went away and I would
also add that these were not
transient effects they persisted
we found no evidence that they
got better
so to speak
I want them off and just turned
around and came right
sociologist Chris Marsh
for the most part where we
saw the hotbed up there
rodney king riots there haven't
been a lot of reinvestment back
in that
community
nor was there much reinvestment
in baltimore's affected
neighborhoods
after the eight-day
uprising here in 1968
so much was left done
so much was left
without being rebuilt but if the
effects of the last rites are
there for
anyone to see why
heard Muslims and Terrence
Rogers a minister in training
under pastor
hickman
as our Darien right Nicholas
Johnson that area my sport
was already destroyed people art
building like they can succeed
in life
will get above
when they're at their boiling
point when it comes to them
lashing out
was the worst that can
happen is already
falling down around us is like
we all live in in this this
this double theirs was a and
yet barely two miles away
Baltimore has been booming over
there is a Four Seasons Hotel
you'll see a crane
their
on top of that is being
constructed nine stories
luxury condominiums over
there you can see the
new regional headquarters a x1
under construction and that is
going to
energize development
on a peninsula known as
Harbor Point baltimore's most
upscale neighborhood this is all
Inner Harbor years is all the
inner harbor of
baltimore
I was no longer goals that
these were riding peers and
there are rats are running all
over the place now today it is a
showpiece for
urban america
the city's driving and
driving at the same time
local real estate investor John
the mayor Jin I hate to say it
but
my life over the last week
was almost totally on
change which seems
a little unfair
being in a city that was writing
at an urban buses office
his young employees
seemed even less phased
how many have you would tell
your friends from other cities
a you still wanna come
to Baltimore every way
I would say the Baltimore still
attractive
location prefer my age group I
think we were just the alarm
normal life after
is if the writing goes away and
the destruction of property goes
away
mostly will forget about it why
have young professionals flocked
here
less than an hour from
washington Baltimore housing is
a third the price
one reason the stigma
the city's riding
core and with the recent unrest
housing may become even more
affordable
but that's what worries
sociologist Chris Marrs it in
some way this is prime
property
so you may have the big
developers want to come in and
push up
brown what folks intensified and
now make it my PC in DC this new
area for young white
folks with 2.5 kids and
Priya's when I look around
his place behind us there
there there I miss
a whole block its
got nobody living in
at all gentrification is
better than that right that's
one way you could look at it but
how about trying to invest in
the people
there
already here one-third of the
people who shop at this mall
make within twenty five thousand
dollars a year at the mondawmin
mall
where last week's rioting began
historian Ethan Conley told us
that perhaps what happened in
Baltimore will galvanize such
investment
10 my hopes in fact is that
this ride will really begin to
initiate a conversation about it
government jobs program that
really will
address
the problem underemployment in
black neighborhoods but that's
because
taxpayer money
and in United States in 2015
taxpayers are particularly
interested in making those kinds
of the best
historically that's actually
true and it's unfortunate
because when the
reasons we've gotten
into this mess
is willing to except taxes for
increasing policing or not
willing to accept taxes for
anti-poverty vertically
anti-poverty measures
targeting communities of color
so maybe the obstacles are
insurmountable
but pastor dante hickman has
a reminder for skeptics
economic and spiritual
life gardens
way
I think opposition lends itself
when you are resilient and
faithful
to greater opportunities
up bro hand at least
all prayed for that economics
correspondent Paul Solman
reporting for the PBS
Newshour from Baltimore
we'll have more on Baltimore
online economist John Carlos
breaks down
some startling statistics about
income inequality in the city
on our home page PBS a
dork slash newshour
over the past few months
newshour student reporting labs
have been looking
into school campus safety
in Arizona one group of our high
school students has been asked
to play an
important role
and making sure everyone on
campus knows what to do in an
emergency
the NewsHour sable brown worked
with some other students for our
latest
American graduate report part of
a public media initiative funded
by the
corporation for
public broadcasting
those are words no school
administrator wants to say
room 160 it scared
in the two years since the mass
shooting at Sandy Hook
Elementary in Connecticut
schools around the country have
been ramping up safety efforts
and experimenting with different
approaches to prepare for
worst-case
scenarios
one High School in Phoenix
challenge students
to help make their schools safer
during a reverse evacuation
student administrators asked
journalism student at South
Mountain High School
to create a video for their
peers on what to do during
emergency situations
principal accretion
Williams made the request
after potentially dangerous
incident caused a lockdown in
the fall
there at lunch at this time
there eating having fun
and and so we literally push the
kids into buildings there right
you know
they're walking faster
now running cuz
may don't know that the
seriousness avid that there's an
alleged person who has a
weapon on campus with a backpack
the response to that incident
wasn't as smooth as school
officials had hoped
goes back to an old sports
cliche which is you
play like to practice have
security Brian McNeill says
regular drills are important
we are marked them
in the back the Rosetta
themselves the whole purpose of
a lockdown
is to minimize casualties
and we know the
sometimes in depending on the
situation we're not going to be
100 percent
you can't you
good we tried to
everybody inside and
securities fast as we can
senior Jose Contreras the lead
producer the student video
says it's been clear for some
time that students need more
information
some classrooms liked
their doors before
other students were and some
students were picking out that
they can get in
Nick created a lotta
chaos and a lot of fear
even to some students many
students were unaware that
teachers are supposed to
lock classroom doors immediately
in many emergency situation
at any Montgomery did
during the drill we were
allowed to film and after that
me it's very important that
we be quiet on that we
we go in our little room are
there in close the door and make
the room look
like it's empty
on and that they bring all their
backpacks and belonging so if
someone
did make it into the main room
they would think this place was
empty
it's a little worse than
worrying about hola at South
Mountain
teachers like the Camry have
written instructions detailee
how to respond to
various emergency
once you become aware this year
they also watched a new training
video
developed with guidance from
first responders educators
mental health professionals
and law enforcement
recent events remind us that
active shooter incidents can
occur anywhere in
our community
when I first watched the video I
cried this really hard to deal
with that
our children can be put in the
care danger Irene D as is the
Phoenix Union
High School District
Supervisor for security
she says the active
shooter action plan video
has helped teachers and staff
become better prepared
we were training our staff with
you get small get quiet we need
to do something
to train
our teachers to prepare them so
that more more kids you survey
should in turn
out like that per
the video though it was
considered inappropriate for
students
and they never saw it but it's
part of the research for their
own video
the journalism students met with
Deborah rep ki the head of the
nonprofit that
created the one for teachers
otherwise I think you guys again
are doing this a really good job
she
suggested they consider
addressing situations
that could come up in an
emergency there could be
situations where you have
rooms that are not lockable so
what is a substitute teacher
what is a student do
in that situation before if
someone happens to be in the
restroom during a
lockdown
a scenario included in the
student's final cut hide inside
the stopper that's
the way from the door
I think for additional
information the young
journalists also interviewed
students and teachers
to learn more about their
schools current emergency
protocols
including what was and wasn't
working history teacher
using room we found
weak spot with our school with
and specifically our department
I
with accessibility you were able
to get through my class would
have access to
all the other
teachers classrooms
within my department
has been addressed
lot two-way locks on doors how
effective which said it yourself
why I fired rose
that which perot's
all I'll all I have been
efficient as I feel the
to be other firsts along we have
November for example
very poor are created
a fire hazard
at the I'll choke
point or stadium
it turns out many people
noticed that problem
describe to me what happens when
you've got fifteen hundred kids
going to the
football field at once
you get to the acting I
mean if you can imagine
so many its sold it to
shoulder trying to get inside
book deal you know
people starving I'll
it just creates more
problems one already
the student journalists shared
what they learned with
administrators
and even though it wasn't news
principal the crucial Williams
wanted to hear
she recognized its value we
have a lot of work to do
we're working you know there's
one liter take care that and
them on covering
those gaps in
communicating them to S
that's just black gold we needed
but even after addressing those
problems there has been one
issue
that keeps coming up you ever
tell you appears to take you
seriously
or precious critical for I
well sometimes I do feel
pressure to lockers bacon but
you don't want to be
the one
that not students for me
by an com as a contrast hopes
the video will change a few
minds about that
not everything is a chill
sometimes real stuff does happen
people need to realize that the
South Mountain journalism
students hope to
eventually distribute their
video to other schools
that requested for the PBS
Newshour I maple brown in
Phoenix
in
after the 2003 invasion of Iraq
British Middle East expert EMA
Skye
joined the US British civilian
operation there advising
Coalition Provisional
Authority chief paul Bremer
and top US military commanders
including generals David
Petraeus and radioed here
now
EMA Skye explores the mistakes
that I made in her new book
the unraveling high hopes
and missed opportunities
in Iraq in the latest addition
to the NewsHour bookshelf
chief foreign affairs
correspondent margaret Warner
talk to her at Busboys
and poets
a local washington bookstore and
the sky welcome thank you for
joining us
cue you opposed the Iraq war
from start what drove you then
to volunteer to go
to help rebuild the country
after the invasion
work but this is my opportunity
to go to Iraq to apologize the
iraqi people for
the war
British government also
volunteers they said it would
just be
three months before we hand the
country back to the iraqis
I've got some skills I can help
rebuild I can help
conflict mediation now
institutional Department
what was the fatal mistake
above the Americans and the
British I mean at what point did
become the
unraveling there
were many mistakes
all the way along so often
in Beijing there was no plan
for what should be done
and the invading forces
didn't have enough troops
there was a power vacuum
all these different gang started
to form then there was the bath
the cation dissolve in the
military and all this led to the
collapse of the
state
and then the Civil War he said
you thought the big mistake was
for the Americans and the
British to try to get iraq to
reorganize on the basis
of ethnicity and sex act
what was the alternative I think
the alternative was to create
the censored
iraqi us and you organized based
on regions and towns as you
don't say we will have
20 percent sony's 20 percent
could sixty percent
Shia you actually think will
have representatives from
bus to from and ball from beale
and that way you're building up
geographical representation
not based on sector ethnicity
instead we wanted to build
a pluralistic society
but what listed wills
institution I sectarianism
so there was nothing about being
iraqi it was all about being a
sub
components paul Bremer dash you
to come to baghdad as his
adviser
talks about that I write the
answer to February 2004
by that stage it was very clear
things were not going well
we had the Apple grape scandal
we had uprisings in furniture
but uprisings in the south with
the Sadrists
and at the Palace we've ever
being balms rocketed into always
sound of gunfire it was
a very dangerous time
and there is a sense that
everything is starting to go
downhill rapidly
and yet you say
ambassador bremer
didn't see it that way when
is optimism become delusional
and one local ambassador graham
is trying to lead in these very
difficult
circumstances
remember the farewell party
had for us and he said
you know for the rest of your
lives to remember how you
brought democracy to
Iraq
and thus the bombs and rockets
were going from the background
but there's a lot I'm going to
remember not trying to remember
the democracy but
now what's it like for
you first evolved
fairly progressive young
woman from Britain
who are suddenly sitting at
the right hand and advising
these powerful american generals
and living with the US military
question huge cultural
shock I mean my life
i'd never work with any military
before let alone the US military
before I got iraq the initial
interaction was a lot of
friction
I came to see quite early on but
these guys wanted to do the
right thing they wanted to
stabilize Iraq so they
could leave
and they had capabilities had
good leaders they had resources
so I calculated my
best use of my skills
was to help them be better
what they were doing
but in 2010 after quelling the
Sunni Shia civil war and al
Qaeda
the American sky says
made a fateful mistake
throwing their weight behind
Shiite prime Minister Nouri al
Maliki
after he narrowly lost the 2010
election against a non-sectarian
rival
there was a sense all do we
uphold the election results
or do we keep my luck in power
general odno was you know we're
Americans
has been an election we
must uphold the results the
others who thought we know my
lucky he will give us a
follow-on security
agreement
so that was the
debate unfortunately
Vice President Biden came down
on the side old there's no one
but Maliki
this is the quickest
option keep the status quo
and weaken get a
security agreement
and then just really
disengage which is what
Washington wanted to kill
washington wants it and the wall
that was the
priority
and the war so what is the
future now that you see for a
wrap
iraq's present is really
Boeing coram got Islamic state
controlling third of the country
reba love us who've served in
Iraq year after year after year
it's really hard and I think the
only way is to maintain hope
is to look at iraq's past
anything you know this is the
land where
had a mini were the land
with the Talmud was written
baghdad was once cultural
capital the Arab world
that is an amazing history and
hope a new generation comes
along that's
inspired
by rocks incredible past and
that's able to build a better
future
musk I thank you
so much thank you
now to our news our shares at
the day something that caught
our I that might
be of interest to you too
highways will soon be making
room for the world's first
self-driving 18-wheeler truck
the time where Freightliner
inspiration is now authorized
for a test drive San
public wrote in a battle with a
state license but the semis
won't be
completely autonomous there will
always be a license truck driver
and the sea
the goal is to reduce driver
fatigue on long-haul trips
but tracking unions are wary of
the change it it might yet take
some time to
persuade lawmakers
and the public that it's a on
that is our online for-profit
colleges are in
the midst of a downturn with
news a bankruptcy scampers
closings
and plummeting student
enrollment at even the most
popular institutions
like the University of Phoenix
how long will the slide last
we have a report from our
partners at Inside Higher Ed
that's on our homepage PBS
star dork slash newshour
tune in later this evening on
Charlie Rose the fallout for the
New England
Patriots
in the wake up to the plate gate
and an editor's note before we
go last night in
our story on Starbucks
push to help
employees get a college
education we stated US student
debt was 1.2 billion
dollars
it is in fact 1.2
trillion dollars
we regret the error and that's
the news hour for tonight on
Friday we explore
the promise
and the concerns around
artificial intelligence the next
technological
frontier
I when I fall will see you
online and again here tomorrow
evening
with david brooks and Ruth
market for all of us here at the
PBS Newshour
thank you and goodnight
in